Hi and welcome to the Web Security Fundamentals course on EdX.
News coverage of security incidents paints a grim picture.
It may even cause you to believe that web applications cannot be secure.
But insecurity is not fundamental to the web platform.
As a matter of fact, the modern web offers a variety of powerful security features that
help stop a hacker.
Unfortunately, few developers have the skills to unleash the full potential of these technologies.
This course is imperative for understanding the fundamental security principles of the
web.
You will learn about common attacks and countermeasures.
In essence, this course offers you the knowledge and skills to build better and more secure
applications.
Before we get started, let me introduce myself.
I am Philippe De Ryck, and I will be your teacher for this course.
I am a professional speaker and trainer on web security and software security.
My goal is to help practitioners understand the threats and dangers in the modern web.
Through training, I empower developers with secure coding practices.
Let me give you a quick overview of the journey we will take together.
This course consists of five chapters.
We start by taking a look at the current state of affairs in web security.
In this introduction, you will get familiar with the underlying security model of the
web.
In the first topic, we explore the communication channel between a browser and a web application.
As you will see, the rise of wireless networks has had a significant impact.
As a consequence, securing the communication channel is considered security priority number
one.
The second topic focuses on unauthorized access to your application and its data.
Preventing unauthorized access requires careful attention to authentication, authorization
and session management mechanisms.
The third topic in this course focuses on the secure handling of untrusted data.
Mishandling untrusted data results in server-side and client-side injection vulnerabilities.
As you will see, preventing such vulnerabilities sounds easier than it is.
By the time we get to the conclusion, we will have covered an enormous amount of content.
Exactly the right moment for a brief overview of the course.
Next, we will recap the best practices that are scattered throughout this course.
This list of best practices can serve as a guideline for building secure applications.
A final word about the format of the course.
Most of the contents in this course are instructional videos.
These videos explain attacks and defenses with visual aides and short demos.
In the documented lab sessions you get hands-on experience with attacks and defenses.
The assessments help you determine how well you have grasped the concepts.
If you have any questions throughout the course, please post them on the discussion board.
That's it for the introduction.
I hope you are excited to get started!