The introduction painted a grim picture about the current state of affairs.
An extensive list of potential threats fuels the impression that web applications are under constant attack.
But is this true?
Isn't this only true for big and important applications, such as banking applications,
healthcare systems, and social networks?
Many people argue that nobody cares about small applications.
Security is less important there because an attacker will not target them.
A perfect example of such an application is BeerSafe, the training application for this course.
It stores tasting notes about beer, which hardly classifies as sensitive personal information.
It does not handle money or goods and does not control physical systems in the real world.
So an attacker would have no reason to attack the BeerSafe application.
It's so unimportant that nobody cares.
This right here is a very dangerous assumption to make.
Let's investigate, and discover why every application is a potential target for attackers.
A simple case to investigate is a public web application.
Take a simple website of a local restaurant as an example.
Such an application holds no private data, so many people assume that security is not that important.
But attackers care about more than data alone.
The restaurant's website runs on a server somewhere, so a first valuable asset is hardware.
If the attacker can execute commands on the server, he can take advantage of the computing resources.
One example is launching mining software for cryptocurrency.
If you let someone else pay the electricity bill, it becomes easy to make a profit.
Another asset is storage space and bandwidth.
The attacker can use the restaurant's web server to host his files.
These files may be illegal wares, malicious exploits, or phishing pages.
This email is a real-life example of why your resources are valuable.
This is a phishing email looking to collect Dropbox credentials.
The email looks legitimate, but the URL behind the link does not point to Dropbox.
Instead, an attacker exploited a vulnerable application to upload the phishing page there.
When you take a step back and look at the bigger picture, things become even worse.
The attacker could take control of the server and enlist it in a botnet.
These botnets consist of thousands or millions of machines and are rented out for money.
Anyone can rent resources in a botnet to run all kinds of commands.
One of the most popular uses of a botnet is launching denial of service attacks.
And it goes even further.
Let's say that the restaurant is often frequented by the employees of a million-dollar company.
That might make it an ideal target for the attacker to use as a stepping stone.
For example, the attacker can inject a malicious payload in the PDF containing the restaurant's menu.
Doing so ensures that the malicious code will be delivered to every visitor that opens the menu.
This could be a very successful first step in the attack against the company.
As you can see, security is something to take seriously.
And so far, we only talked about a public application without any sensitive data.
As you can imagine, such applications are becoming scarce.
Most applications handle some personal data.
Even our BeerSafe application has user accounts, with passwords and personal information.
This kind of data is valuable to an attacker in a variety of ways.
One example is the theft of data from your systems, also known as a data breach.
Having access to all the data of an application puts the attacker in control.
In most cases, the attacker tries to leverage the data for financial gain.
One way to do that is by extorting the company that owns the data.
The attackers threaten to release all the data online unless the company pays up.
This happened to a cosmetic surgery clinic, where the attackers threatened to release patient records.
The records included nude pictures, passport scans, and insurance data.
Another approach is selling personal data.
Personal data, such as email addresses or credit card numbers, is worth a lot on underground marketplaces.
For example, a single credit card number is worth one dollar.
It increases in value if it is associated with additional information, such as the name
of the owner, a home address or an email address.
A last example is the recent flood of ransomware attacks.
After breaking in, an attacker would encrypt all the data on a server.
If you want to decrypt that data, you need to pay the attacker for the right decryption key.
Ransomware attacks are surprisingly successful.
One common reason to pay the ransom is that there are no working backups.
But even if there are backups, think about the impact of retrieving them and restoring all the data.
In a major hospital, this would take a couple of hours or even days.
With that in mind, it may be easier to pay the ransom to get all systems back online.
As you can see, financial gain is an important motive for the attacker to go after the data of an application.
This overview illustrated that security is a concern for every application.
Even the most insignificant ones.
Remember that every application has valuable resources.
Most applications also have valuable data.
So the argument that nobody is interested in your application is no longer valid.