We have become dependent on internet access everywhere.
Coffee shops, bars, and restaurants even use free Wifi as a selling point.
But have you ever wondered how this evolution impacts security?
Recall the last time you connected to a public wireless network.
Did you reflect on the trustworthiness of the network?
If you are honest, the answer is probably "no."
Don't feel bad; you are not alone.
Studies have shown that most users do not think twice about connecting to open wireless networks.
But what does this mean for your application?
Can you offer any security guarantees if your users are on an insecure network?
In this module, you will find out that you actually can.
But getting it right may be harder than you imagine.
The rise of insecure networks is the reason that HTTPS is now the baseline for secure
applications.
The correct use of HTTPS prevents many network-based attacks and helps keep your users safe.
In fact, HTTPS is so important that browsers have started chastising plain HTTP websites.
Not only are these sites explicitly marked as insecure, but they are no longer able to
access new and sensitive APIs.
In this module, you will get a thorough understanding of the security properties that HTTPS offers.
We will analyze why the handshake to establish an HTTPS connection is the most crucial step.
And we go even further.
We elaborate on the importance of certificates to ensure the security properties of HTTPS.
When we talk about certificates, we also need to discuss the fragility of the underlying
ecosystem.
An ecosystem designed over 20 years ago and still in active use today.
Granted, over the past few years, additional security technologies have expanded this ecosystem.
Therefore, we will explore the most significant weaknesses and the technologies that address them
During the assignments, you will get hands-on experience with deploying and configuring HTTPS.
Serving a brand new application over HTTPS is not that hard.
However, you will see that transitioning a legacy application from HTTP to HTTPS is a different story.
At the end of this module, you will have gained the knowledge and skills to ensure your applications
are following current best practices for deploying HTTPS.