Hi! Before we dive into the first technical chapter of this course
I wanted to set the scene a bit. I have invited Mathy Vanhoef to join us.
Mathy has a PhD on the security of wireless networks and he is still working on
breaking them. In fact his work was partially responsible for browsers
deprecating RC4, one of the most used algorithms in HTTPS.
So, I could not think of anyone better to paint a scary picture.
Hi Mathy, thank's for joining us.
It's a pleasure to be here.
So, you're working on wireless security? So, let me
open... Well first of all, Wi-Fi networks are essentially everywhere so everybody
is using Wi-Fi, but is security really that different in a wireless network
than compared to a wired network?
Yes, it is, because if you look at a wired
network and you want to gain access to a wired network as an attacker, you would
need physical access to the cable, which generally means you need access to the
building. You need to get inside and somehow find the cable in order to plug
into it. However with a wireless network you simply have to be nearby. So you can
park your car on the parking lot and try to access the wireless network from
there. Or there are even techniques that you can access a wireless network from
up to a kilometer or two away. So, it becomes much easier for an attacker to
access your wireless network. So, it definitely increases the risks.
Really, two kilometers away to access a wireless network?
Yes, they pulled that off. In one case they even used Pringles cans
to enhance the wireless signal so it can even be done quite cheaply.
Ok, that's definitely a big change compared to
wired networks. So, with wireless networks we have all these different types.
We have an open network but you also have networks with passwords and things.
Can you elaborate a bit on the differences between those?
Yes, so you have an open
network which of course means that there is no security. So, anyone can connect to
this network and all the data you transmit over it can also be intercepted
by people. So, they can read what you send over that network. You also
have networks where you have to use a password and that is of course more
secure, at least if no one else has the password. So for example, if you are at a
hotel or at a conference or maybe at a coffee shop,
everyone knows the password to this network and that would still be a risk.
And then you also have more professional networks where you have a username and a
password and I would say those are the most secure ones.
Okay, that's good to hear.
so everybody talks about: "yeah you can
listen to a wireless network blah blah..." but nobody really knows how that
works. So, when people talk about this, this is a hypothetical problem and it
seems like hard to do and only a few people know how to do it. But you
prepared a demo when you came here, right? So, we're gonna actually do it
right here in the studio and we're gonna see how eavesdropping on the network
works. So, what I'm gonna do is: I'm going to visit the demo application for
this online course and you're gonna have to see if you can grab the signal
from my cellphone.
What's gonna happen now?
So, here I'm just using my
normal laptop and basically every laptop with a Wi-Fi card you can use for this.
So, anyone can do this. They just need to install Linux and then can they can do
the same things as I'm going to do now. So, what I did here, I took my laptop and
I configured my wireless chip to listen to all the nearby traffic and now I'm
going to listen to our network only, so we don't intercept other traffic
and we're going to try to intercept your requests that you make.
Yeah, OK, so our network is called "open network", kind of obvious what what the thing is
supposed to do and my cell phone is already connected to it.
OK, so let's now start the capture here. So, we have our wireless interface. We're going to
start monitoring packets and I now have it set so we only see the traffic
that you transmit. So currently, we don't see anything. So, if you now visit for
example just any HTTP website, we should be able to capture it and see the website
you are visiting. - OK, let's try this out.
Let me go to the training
application for this online course. - OK, we already see the requests here
So apparently, you visited BeerSafe?
Yes, indeed beer safe is the application
that we're gonna run the labs on during the course. So, it's an application
to keep track of tasting notes for beer.  - Interesting
You might be interested in that.
Yeah, of course! - We're Belgians of course.
So yes, can you explain a bit
what you see here in a request? - So, here we see the request being made to
the website. We have HTTP requests. They are unencrypted and because they
are sent over the unencrypted wireless network, we can intercept all these
requests. For example, here we see the HTTP request. We can see that it is
indeed to beersafe.eu. We can see the cookies being sent and all other
kinds of information - So, you can see the actual information. So, if I log into this
application, you will be able to see the username and password - Yes, we should be
able to capture that, yeah. - Let me try if that works
I'm obviously not gonna use
my real use my real username and password. Let's see what... - And here, we already see it.
We have the post request here, which submits your password and username to the
website. So, let's try to find it here. Here, we have the data that you have sent.
Well, it should be in here. So, as you can see your username was
'hello' and the password in this case was 'Mathy'. So, we got it.
Wow, that's amazing. So it's really not that hard. Well, probably the hardest
part is installing Linux, right? Yeah, exactly. I mean you can Google for this
how to capture unencrypted wireless traffic and you will just see a
step-by-step guide and if you have a laptop you can do this yourself. It's
really easy. - Wow okay, and actually in practice it can be even more easy.
I brought a device here. It's called a Wi-Fi Pineapple you probably know what this does
So this is a... well maybe you should explain it - Well, I know the basics
about it. So, the interesting thing here is that here the user had to actively
connect to our network, but this Wi-Fi Pineapple, it can see the networks that
you previously connected to and it can
imitate those networks. - So, if I'm connected to the library network
occasionally, I come here where the library is way too far away, this thing will be able
to mimic that network? Yeah, exactly! Or if you used to connect to an open
network at an airport or at a coffee shop it will see the name of the network
that you used and it will basically clone this network and your device will
automatically connect to it. And then we can intercept traffic like we have just shown.
Okay, wow, and it can do a lot more than simply listening to the traffic, right?
You can start manipulating and modifying things. - Exactly, because the
Pineapple, because it sets up its own network, it can not only just intercept
traffic it can also modify the request you make and inject content into
websites you visit. So for example, it can inject ads. That's done a lot, but it can
also inject viruses or malware to try to really attack your PC specifically.
Wow, okay so wireless networks are less secure then wired networks. - Yes, you should
not use open networks. - Open networks, okay, I'm gonna try but as you said:
"airports". They only have open networks and of course you need
internet access, so... - So, a lot of people do it, yeah. And it's a problem.
You mentioned wireless networks with passwords before, but those are a bit
more secure but if everybody knows the password then that security goes
away, of course. - Yes, exactly! So, if your password is secure and no one
else has it and then that's a good solution as long as you have a complex
password. Otherwise, you can still guess it, but let's say that you're at
a hotel or at a conference or maybe at some kind of coffee shop where everyone
knows the password. Well, in that case, the attacker can simply set up an exact copy
of the network with that password as well. So, an attacker can still intercept
everything that you send. It can still monitor all the traffic and it can
even inject content into websites. So, if someone else knows the password, it's
basically the same as running an open network. You don't have any security.
Okay, that's really surprising. Well indeed, that's not a good thing, but
between us even if you have a password that nobody else knows, you'll be able to
find it, right? - There are some techniques to still do it. So, you can automatically try
to guess a lot of passwords. So, if you use a weak one,
we can crack that. Even though, if you use a strong one, it's still possible to
attack it. For example, there was a flaw in Wi-Fi Protected setup, WPS
and that can sometimes be abused to still gain access to the network.
Okay, that's very good to know. I don't think many people realize that.
They think: "oh, I have a password that must be safe". And you can go even further, right?
You're doing research on breaking even more complex security systems in
wireless networks? Yes, exactly. We recently found a flaw in the Wi-Fi
standard itself and this allows you to attack most devices even though they are
fully secured and used all the recommended practices. So, configuring a
Wi-Fi network on Wi-Fi devices to be fully secure, it's a very difficult task.
I can imagine and most users have no, they just plug it in, hope it works
and if it doesn't then they're already stuck so it's a nightmare.
But to be honest this course is not about setting up wireless networks.
This course is about building secure web applications. So, my main question is...
Well, a lot of people know that HTTPS actually helps against these kind of things.
So, would HTTPS help in this scenario? What does it offer and how can it help
remediate insecure networks? Yes, HTTPS would definitely help here.
The reason that is the case, is because when you visit a website using HTTPS,
the HTTPS protocol makes sure you are talking to this website and nothing else.
So, you are sure that you are communicating to the website that you
want and on top of that it, also encrypts your traffic. So, no one can see what you
are sending and it also authenticates your traffic, which basically means that
no one can modify data or inject content into a web page. So, let's say you are
connected to an open network, if you then use HTTPS to,
for example, log into a website or send your credit card information.
Then an attacker would not be able to attack you, because HTTPS takes care of all the
security risks. So, that would definitely help defend you. - Alright,
thanks! So even if you're on an insecure Network, if you see the green
lock icon and the green URL bar even, in some cases, then you're probably sure
that it's the right website. - If you use a protected Wi-Fi network, your data is
essentially protected until it goes to the access point. In other words, it's
only protected on the first hop of the internet, but everything beyond that,
it's still unencrypted. HTTPS however ensures end-to-end encryption, meaning it's
protected all along the way when your traffic goes over the internet.
Yeah, so essentially, it protects the traffic from the browser till the server and
everything in between is not able to read or modify the traffic without
being detected. - Yeah so, with HTTPS you know that it's
always protected until it reaches the server. With Wi-Fi only the first
step is protected and beyond that it can... It probably is still unencrypted.
Of course, and we talked about websites, but I had a phone before and mobile apps,
they use HTTP traffic as well, but you just don't see it, right? So, you don't know
whether they using HTTPS, is that correct?  - Yes, that's indeed one disadvantage.
If you are using an app, you don't know whether it's using HTTPS or not. So, you might be
at risk if you use apps. - Thanks a lot for the explanation. Thanks a lot for the
demo. I think that's going to be an eye-opener for a lot of people. How easy
it actually is to capture this traffic. Before we say goodbye, do you
have a key take-away message? So, what can you recommend developers across the
world and users of websites to remain secure, even when using open networks
when they have no choice? - Yeah, so I would say the best option here is to use HTTPS
and to properly configure it of course, but that's the best defense that we have.
Because as we mentioned, sometimes you're at an airport, you only have an open
network to use and you want to be secure even in that case and then HTTPS is one
of the best options you can use. So, I would
definitely recommend developers to make sure that their
website is accessible over HTTPS. - Yeah OK. Thanks for the practical advice and
that's exactly what we're gonna cover in the remainder of this chapter. So,
hopefully after people have attended this course or followed this course, they
will be able to deploy HTTPS for everything. Thanks for being here!
You're welcome! - So, as I said in the remainder of this chapter, we will look
at how to configure HTTPS correctly and how to make sure that your entire
website runs over HTTPS.