So far, we have covered the security properties and underlying principles of HTTPS.
But once you start deploying HTTPS in a real-life scenario, all kinds of questions will rise.
Can you run different HTTPS sites on one server?
Where do you store the sensitive cryptographic material?
What happens if you use a third-party service for traffic optimization?
Questions like these make deploying HTTPS seem complicated.
Do you remember the myth that you can only run one HTTPS application per IP address?
It may surprise you that until a few years ago, that myth was a stone-cold reality.
To understand why, we need to take another look at the TLS handshake.
As you can see in the schematic here, the browser translates a domain name to an IP address.
The browser uses the IP address to initiate a connection to that server.
When TLS is used, the server responds with a certificate,
tied to the domain name of the web application.
The browser verifies the certificate and establishes the secure connection.
Only then will the browser start sending HTTP traffic.
Sounds good.
But take a moment to think about the following problem.
What if the server is running three different web applications, with three different domain names
and three different certificates?
In such a scenario, the server needs to know which application the browser is connecting to.
Otherwise, the server has no idea which certificate to use.
If the server uses the wrong certificate, the browser will detect a mismatch
between the domain of the certificate and that of the actual request.
As a result, the browser shows a warning to the user and aborts the connection.
Unfortunately, the TLS handshake does not support sending the domain name of the application
up front.
Because of this limitation, you could run only one HTTPS application per IP address.
But modern browsers and operating systems support a TLS extension
known as Server Name Indication, or SNI.
With SNI enabled, the client includes the domain name of the application it is connecting to
in the first step of the handshake.
Now that the domain name is known up front, the server can select the right certificate.
In this scenario, SNI is essential to establish the connection without errors.
The capability of running multiple HTTPS sites on one IP address
enables a broad range of practical deployment scenarios.
One example is deploying a reverse proxy service as a dedicated TLS endpoint.
The proxy establishes the secure communication channel with a client.
In the background, the proxy forwards all requests to internal services.
This setup can seem a bit strange but offers several benefits.
First, the deployment of internal services becomes a lot more practical.
Now, they no longer need to worry about the public-facing TLS configuration.
But this scenario offers a significant security benefit as well.
It isolates the cryptographic material on a separate host or container.
This isolation keeps the cryptographic material out of reach when an attacker targets the web application.
Don’t worry if you have no idea how to deploy a reverse proxy to setup this scenario.
Specialized companies are offering various traffic optimization services, including the configuration of HTTPS.
One example of such a company is CloudFlare.
CloudFlare offers protection against denial of service attacks, but also supports the deployment of HTTPS.
They offer various deployment schemes, including advanced enterprise options.
With CloudFlare, you can even ensure that HTTP applications are served over HTTPS.
Of course, in this scenario, the traffic between CloudFlare and your application will still be plain text.
There is, however, one side effect with these deployment schemes.
Because an external service handles HTTPS, there is no secure end-to-end communication channel.
The service offering HTTPS support has a full man in the middle position, giving it full access to all traffic.
Using such a service means accepting the risk that there is another trusted party,
which can become compromised or turn malicious.