At the beginning of this module, we introduced three security properties of TLS:
confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity.
The first two are robust and straightforward.
Once both parties possess a shared secret, confidentiality and integrity follow from
the correct use of cryptographic algorithms.
Here, we zoom in on the third property, authenticity, which is a lot more delicate.
Earlier, we explained authenticity as verifying the validity of a certificate.
While technically correct, we did omit the details about issuing and verifying a certificate.
Supporting these features on the web means introducing a whole ecosystem.
Certificates are issued by a Certificate Authority, or CA in short.
When the CA issues a new certificate, it signs the certificate using its private key.
The browser can verify a certificate by using the CA’s public key to verify the signature.
If it matches, the browser knows that the certificate is issued by the CA,
and decides to trust it.
But now we have the same problem as before.
How can the browser know whether a key belongs to a CA or not?
Well, the system works with different levels of CAs.
A CA signing end user certificates is an intermediate CA.
An intermediate CA, in turn, needs a certificate from a higher-level CA to prove the legitimacy
of its key material.
This process can continue for a few steps until it reaches the highest level.
At this level, we find CAs known as root CAs.
Since root CAs are the highest level of certificate authorities, there is no higher authority
to vouch for the validity of their key.
That is why every browser and operating system has a list of hardcoded root CAs.
Browsers and operating systems trust these root CAs by default.
Mozilla Firefox provides an easy way to consult the list of root CAs.
As you can see here, the browser trusts many CAs by default.
Whenever the browser needs to verify a certificate, it will verify every certificate in the chain,
until it reaches a trusted root CA.
A browser only trusts certificates with a valid signature chain,
on the condition that the other properties are also valid.
These properties include, among others, a domain name, a start date, and an expiration date
All the properties of a certificate are added when the CA generates and signs the certificate.
Since the CA issues a certificate for a particular domain name, it implies that it should only
respond to legitimate requests.
If an attacker attempts to request a certificate for the beersafe.eu domain,
we expect the CA to deny this request.
Otherwise, the attacker can use this certificate to impersonate our application.
The latter not only violates authenticity but also undermines confidentiality and integrity.
But how can a CA verify whether a request for a certificate is legitimate?
The most common way is to verify whether the requester is in control of the domain
for which the certificate is being requested.
One way to verify this is by sending a code to a reserved email address, such as postmaster@beersafe.eu.
Only the legitimate owner can access such an email address.
Another way would be to request that a particular response is placed at a specific location
on the web server.
Again, this is something that only an administrator can do, as it requires full access to the web server
These types of validation are what we call domain validation.
Certificates with domain validation are the cheapest and most common variant.
CAs also offer certificates with organization validation and extended validation.
For these types of validation, the CA performs more rigorous checks than verifying domain ownership.
In return, these types of certificates are more expensive as well.
For certificates with organization validation, there is no defined set of verification guidelines.
For extended validation certificates, there is such a set.
The checks include verifying the details of the business making the request,
as well as the right to use the domain name.
On a cryptographic level, the type of validation does not impact the security of the connection.
So is there an advantage of spending more money on a certificate, only to get stricter
verification procedures?
Yes, there is, but it is subtle.
The biggest difference is the browser UI.
For extended validation certificates, the browser shows more information in the address bar.
Most browsers choose to show the business name right next to the URL.
For domain validation or organization validation, the browser only shows the lock icon.
As you can see on this overview, each browser has their specific UI, but they more or less
agree on how to handle extended validation certificates.
To conclude, all CA-issued certificates offer the same level of cryptographic security.
Stricter verification procedures can exert more trust,
but only if the user even notices the difference.