Before, we stated that the ecosystem surrounding certificates is quite fragile.
Let’s take a look at the biggest problem we are currently facing:
the unconditional trust in the root CAs.
A modern browser trusts hundreds of root CAs, hence thousands of intermediate CAs.
Anyone of these CAs can issue a certificate for our beersafe.eu application.
Even an obscure Chinese CA under government control.
As long as every step in the chain is trusted, the browser will not complain.
We have seen problems with this trust model in the past.
CAs have mistakenly issued certificates before.
Attackers have been able to trick CAs into giving out certificates for domains they did not own.
And even worse, attackers have compromised CAs, enabling them to issue fraudulent certificates.
One of the most noteworthy incidents was the hacking of DigiNotar, a Dutch CA.
In this particular case, the attackers issued a wildcard certificate for all google.com services.
A certificate that every browser considered to be valid at the time.
Several technologies have been proposed to address this problem.
Here, two technologies are relevant to discuss.
The first is Certificate Transparency, or CT.
With CT, CAs are required to publish all certificates they issue into a public log.
Anyone can consult the log, and detect the issuing of a fraudulent certificate.
Upon detection of such a fraudulent certificate, the CA is notified and the certificate revoked.
We will discuss certificate transparency in a bit more detail in the next part.
For now, it suffices to know that this is a detective measure, not a preventive one.
A complementary technology is Certificate Authority Authorization, or CAA.
CAA allows a domain owner to limit the number of CAs that are allowed to issue certificates for a domain.
Doing so stops any other CA from mistakenly issuing a certificate for your domain.
You can configure CAA through dedicated DNS records, which the CA needs to check
before issuing a certificate.
Granted, this may not be a waterproof countermeasure, but it will help to avoid mistakes on the part of the CA.
CAs must check the CAA record, and honor its preferences as of September 2017.
Alternative solutions propose to determine up front which key the server can use.
Fixating the key makes it impossible for an attacker to use his own key pair
in combination with a fraudulent certificate.
Two approaches to achieve this are using HTTP Public Key Pinning, or the DANE DNS extension.
Experience shows that pinning is hard to get right,
which is why these technologies see a limited adoption rate.
To conclude, it is important to keep in mind that the trust model of HTTPS hinges on the legitimacy of a certificate.
The security properties hold, as long as the attacker is not able to obtain a valid certificate for a domain.