Preventing unauthorized access to your application and data is easier said than done.
Consider the authentication procedure in your application.
Would you know if an attacker impersonates a user?
But authentication is only the first step.
How do you keep track of this authentication state during the user's session?
And did you know that many applications accept fraudulent operations in the user's name?
These questions highlight various challenges with preventing unauthorized access.
In this module, we will show how to get access control right.
We will untangle authentication, session management and authorization piece by piece.
Authentication in web applications is one of these topics with a long history.
Everybody has their idea of how to do it, and most of these ideas are antiquated.
That is why we will investigate common misconceptions about storing credentials
You will learn the proper way to store credentials.
We also explore the benefits of deploying multi-factor authentication.
On top of that, we will see how enumeration attacks are a nasty stepping stone to brute
force attacks.
The second part of this module focuses on what happens after authentication.
Many applications keep track of the user's authenticated state in a session object.
Sadly most of them fail to get the details of secure session management right.
The third piece of the puzzle is authorization.
The requirements for authorization are twofold.
On the one hand, the application needs to enforce proper permissions on access to data
or operations.
But on the other hand, the application also needs to ensure that actions carried out in
the user's name are intentional.
Unfortunately, these are not straightforward tasks in a web application.
We will see how an attacker can trick an application by abusing legitimate behavior.
At the end of this module, we will have untangled this puzzle.
You will understand the challenges with secure authentication, authorization and session
management.
You will also be able to prevent unauthorized access using a set of best practices.