We have been talking about injection vulnerabilities for a while now.
So far, we have only considered cross-site scripting, where the payload is malicious JavaScript code.
Unfortunately, that is only part of the story.
HTML pages contain various other types of content as well.
The injection of such content can also result in practical attacks.
These alternative injection attacks use various types of content.
Two typical examples are the injection of HTML code and CSS code.
A bit more exotic is the injection of SVG code or vulnerable Flash files.
In this part, we dive deeper into HTML injection and CSS injection attacks.
Here, you can see an example of an HTML injection attack.
As you can see, the attacker-provided data contains a piece of HTML code,
which will end up in the generated page.
We will talk about the consequences of HTML injection in a bit.
For now, take a closer look at the code example.
Does this seem familiar?
You probably recognize this example from when we talked about cross-site scripting.
The injection of a script tag is, in essence, a variation of an HTML injection attack.
We have covered the consequences of script injection attacks in a lot of detail before.
But preventing the injection of script tags alone is not enough.
The injection of plain HTML elements can also have severe consequences.
Let’s take another look at our initial example of HTML injection.
As you can see here, the attacker has injected an image tag.
A closer inspection reveals two things.
First, the source attribute of the image tag uses a single quote.
Second, the image tag is not closed at the end.
Such an attack can result in the exfiltration of data.
To be successful, the injection needs to happen in the right place in a page.
Here, you see a snippet of the page that the browser will render.
The colorization of the code already indicates the consequence of the attack.
Remember, the source attribute of the image tag used a single quote, and the tag was open at the end.
As a result, the browser considers everything up to the next single quote to be part of the source URL.
When the browser fetches this image, it leaks a large chunk of the page as the parameter of the URL.
This data can contain personal information about the user, or security tokens.
Data exfiltration is only one example of an attack.
Another example is the injection of a base tag.
Setting the base tag allows the attacker to override all relative URLs in a page.
Another attack abuses form functionality.
By injecting hidden input fields, the attacker can overwrite legitimate form values.
Even worse, by injecting form tags or buttons, the attacker can redirect an entire form.
Again, these attacks can result in the disclosure of sensitive information.
These examples show that plain HTML code can already be quite dangerous.
So how can we defend against these HTML injection vulnerabilities?
By ensuring that the browser does not confuse HTML in our data fields as code.
Like before, we can apply context-sensitive output encoding to avoid this confusion altogether.
Again, applying these defenses in a consistent manner is the real challenge.
An alternative defense strategy is the use of sanitization.
However, the effectiveness of sanitization against HTML injection attacks depends on the sanitizer.
Some of these payloads use harmless HTML elements.
As a result, a sanitizer may not see them as malicious or dangerous.
The injection of HTML code is only one of many ways to abuse an injection vulnerability.
Another way is the injection of seemingly harmless CSS code as part of a style element.
But make no mistake, even the injection of plain CSS code can cause a lot of harm.
Here are a few examples of what an attacker can do by injecting CSS code.
One of the more obvious consequences is the defacement of a web page.
A more extreme example is the execution of JavaScript code, right from within the CSS context.
Sounds crazy, right?
At a certain point in time, one particular browser supported this behavior.
Fortunately, today, no modern browser still supports this.
A more advanced attack scenario abuses CSS selectors.
With CSS selectors, an attacker can probe the contents of individual HTML elements or attributes.
The mechanism behind this attack is brute forcing selectors to match specific characters.
The example you see here illustrates the idea behind the attack.
This attack is not useful against elements with a lot of content.
However, it can be quite effective against elements with limited input.
Examples of such elements are input fields for passwords, or hidden fields containing security tokens.
As before, the proper defense is context-sensitive output encoding.
For sanitization, it again depends on the specific sanitizer.
If style elements are considered harmful, sanitization will work as a defense.
But if they are not, your application is probably vulnerable to CSS injection.
Here's what you should remember from this part.
Injection attacks are a lot more versatile than script injection alone.
Nonetheless, the proper defense against injection attacks is context-sensitive output encoding.
The true challenge is applying this in a consistent manner throughout the application.