Origin-based isolation and sandboxing can be used to isolate specific blocks of content.
But it is a challenge to deploy these techniques as an application-wide second line of defense.
The recent Content Security Policy, also known as CSP, is better suited for this purpose.
Since the first version of CSP in 2012, it has grown into a complex security policy with various options.
Here, we introduce the basic concepts behind CSP.
In the next part, we go a bit more into the details.
A CSP policy defines the intended behavior of a page and prevents actions that violate these intentions.
Take a look at this example of a CSP policy.
As you can see, CSP offers control over various kinds of content, such as scripts, styles, and images.
For each of these resources, you can specify where they can originate from.
Whenever the page requests resources that are not listed in the CSP policy,
the browser refuses to load them.
But how can we leverage CSP as a defense against content injection attacks?
Let's start by taking a look at XSS, where the attacker injects script code into the application.
One common way to exploit an XSS vulnerability is by injecting inline scripts.
In an inline script block, the malicious code is embedded between script tags
and is executed when encountered by the browser.
A second way to exploit XSS vulnerabilities is to load remote scripts.
In this scenario, the injected code instructs the browser to load a remote file containing malicious code.
The CSP policy you see here stops both kinds of attacks.
By default, CSP no longer executes inline script blocks.
So even if the attacker injects script code into the page, the browser will not execute it.
Remote script files are only loaded if the CSP policy whitelists them.
The policy you see here tells the browser that scripts can come from 'self',
a value referring to the application's origin.
The browser will refuse to load scripts from other external hosts.
Thus, this policy prevents the second type of XSS attack.
Script content is highly interactive, which is why the script-src directive is quite complicated.
Similar in complexity is the style-src directive, which controls stylesheets.
Stylesheets are also considered to be interactive and are subject to the same restrictions as script content.
By default, CSP prevents inline styles from being executed.
Other types of content are more static, and thus more straightforward.
The sources for content such as images, fonts, and media elements can be listed in the policy.
The browser will only load them if they are whitelisted.
Let’s take another look at our example CSP policy.
Now you understand that each of the directives controls a particular type of content.
As we have seen earlier, scripts and stylesheets are subject to additional restrictions.
The first line of the policy contains a directive that we have not yet covered: default-src.
This is the default directive used when a more specific directive is absent.
Here is an example of what the default-src directive actually means.
We remove the img-src directive from our policy but retain the default-src directive.
If the page tries to load a remote image, the browser uses the default-src directive,
since there is no img-src directive.
Note that the browser does not combine the default-src directive with a more specific directive.
Either the more specific directive applies, or the default-src directive applies.
If both are absent, then no restrictions apply.
Whenever the browser detects a violation of a CSP policy,
it shows an error message in the developer console.
But of course, when a violation happens in the user's browser, these messages are not very useful.
That is why CSP offers a reporting feature.
To enable the reporting feature, you need to add the report-uri directive to the policy.
The contents of the directive specify the URL of a reporting endpoint.
Once enabled, the browser will send reports about detected violations to this endpoint.
This way you get feedback on detected violations within the browsers of your users.
With this feedback, you can detect potential misconfigurations or attacks in your application.
CSP also supports a report-only mode.
In report-only mode, violations do not result in the blocking of the resource.
Instead, the browser loads the resource as usual but sends a report of the detected violation to the endpoint.
One way to use report-only mode is to try out a CSP policy.
Another way is to detect specific types of content like we did when we needed to detect
mixed content in our applications.
Let's summarize what CSP brings to the table.
To enable CSP, the application includes the Content-Security-Policy header in the response.
The browser will enforce this policy on the page that it is loading.
Here you can see that the browser checks the policy before loading external script files.
The policy only allows script files from our origin.
But when an attacker injects an inline script block, the policy prevents its execution.
Script files from non-whitelisted hosts are also blocked.
A CSP policy can also include the report-uri directive.
This directive instructs the browser to send a report for every violation it detects.
With these reports, we can detect potential attacks or misconfigurations.
That concludes this brief introduction to CSP.
Remember that CSP is intended as a second line of defense against content injection attacks.
The application still needs to deploy proper defenses.
But with CSP, the impact of the attack is limited in case these defenses fail.